[reference on Boglepedia](https://www.bogleheads.org/wiki/ETFs_vs_mutual_funds)

ETFs and mutual funds share similar tax efficiency tactics, but ETFs can further reduce taxable events and trading costs

For capital gains specifically, the resource pool structure of the mutual fund and ETF provides it an advantage to minimize capital gains tax for the investor. Higher capitals gains occur when you sell a share that went up higher in price relative to when you bought it. When a fund stock redemption occurs (issuer buys back their own security aka when investor sells the share), the fund has the flexibility to give away the stocks with the lowest purchase price and sell the stocks in the fund with the highest price to minimize capital gains. They also have the flexibility to sell equities with longer holding periods as the tax on [equities of varying periods have varying tax amounts.](Tax%20Loss%20Harvesting%20and%20Wash%20sale.md#^2114c8) Funds can also employ tax loss harvesting to defer and/or reduce taxes on capital gains, but mutual funds holding individual stocks are at a disadvantage. [To employ tax loss harvesting, mutual funds may lose their position on stocks that play a key role in their portfolio to avoid a wash sale while ETFs can flip flop between indexes that track the same markets and are effectively identical](Tax%20Loss%20Harvesting%20and%20Wash%20sale.md).

Generally index ETFs inherently reduce [taxable events](ETF%20Distributions%20and%20the%20impacts%20on%20ACB.md) by not actively managing them. Compared to their index mutual fund counterparts, the ETF can further reduce taxable events as the ETF is a security itself that can be traded with other investors shielding the fund from having to satisfy investor withdrawals. Theoretically, this means ETFs benefit from more popularity and higher volumes to reduce the amount of times these redemption scenario reducing taxable events for the investor by minimizing in-fund trading

The ETF creation structure and its ability to adjust its own ETF supply further reduces taxable events and also reduces trading  costs in the scenarios where it must complete large sale/purchase orders. The creation of a bundle of stocks, that is the ETF, is referred to as a creation unit. The term creation unit emphasizes how there is another middle-man between the ETF itself and the trading of the underlying assets that can shield the ETF from capital gains unlike mutual funds which have to directly deal with the underlying assets sometimes.  Only certain authorized dealers (also called authorized participants or AP) can redeem ETF units directly and the ETF is redeemed by "in-kind" redemption transactions (i.e. trading security ETF for security stocks). With "in-kind" transactions, the AP is the one that shoulders the trading costs and capital gains cost of the underlying asset. Although transactions with cash do occur and the investor must look for that in their capital gains tax. The ETF redemption scenario of course only occurs if the market maker is unable to find another retail investor to purchase the security and avoids security and stock redemption all together. 

These tactics do nothing for dividends which will still be taxed at the designated rate (remember dividends tax rate is separate and typically lower than capital gains tax because the company already pays taxes on that revenue). Note that reinvesting the dividend [such as in a Dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP)](Dividend%20reinvestment%20plan%20(DRIP).md), does not avoid dividend taxes.

## Key Terms
- Mutual fund redemption
	- The term redemption has different meanings with bonds for example. Here with mutual funds it essentially means the investor wants to withdraw cash.
- n-fund trading
- Creation unit
