Learned from [Investopedia](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/taxgainlossharvesting.asp)

Tax loss harvesting is the reduction of capital gains tax by selling intentionally for a realized loss to offset realized gains to reduce taxes at the moment you sell. This keeps let you keep more of your money at work for longer and makes it more tax efficient. 

You can then spend the tax deductible on another stock that you expect to appreciate in value and perform better than the stock you just sold. Note that you cannot buy back the stock you sold for 30 days as that would be an illegal wash sale. Your loss would be called a "superficial loss" which you cannot use as a [tax deduction](Tax%20deduction%20vs%20Tax%20credit.md) for 30 days. The tradeoff is that because you made losses on your short-term holdings, it reduces the ACB increasing potential capital gains, so if the stock ever goes up, you lose out, with the premise being that no reasonable investor holds a stock expecting it to go down. In this way, you're not really cancelling taxes, but deferring it.

The strategy can go one step further and take advantage of the fact that equities held for varying lengths are taxed at different rates depending on your income. Equities held for a longer time and sold are taxed less to encourage more investors, while shorter held equities are taxed higher. In other words, short terms gains are taxed higher than long-term gains. This becomes useful for a fund that holds the same stock of varying holding periods where you can offset the gains of short-term capital gains with long-term capital losses. In this case, you're reducing the tax paid rather and deferring it. 

For retail investors, the CRA lets you carry capital losses back 3 years, that is if you had any capital gains in the past 3 years, you can realize a loss to regain what you had paid in tax, letting you put your taxed money back to work. But remember, you can't use the money from your sale plus the tax credit o then just buy back the original stock or it is a wash sale in which case you
The strategy can really be leveraged with index ETFs to avoid wash sales. As long as you buy a different index that has the same or similar market exposure, it is still effectively the same ETF. 
Say hypothetically you have stock that has an unrealized loss that you hold and you expect to appreciate in price (no rational investor would hold a stock they expect to go bankrupt), you can realise that loss to offset any gains and then immediately buy back the stock you believed in, but unfortunately that is an illegal wash sale. But applied to index funds, instead of illegally buying back the stock, you can instead buy a different index fund that has the same underlying assets. In fact this is what fund managers do frequently to minimize [capital gains distribution](ETF%20Taxable%20events%20and%20the%20impacts%20on%20ACB.md). But you need to be careful as the CRA has issued a [bulletin](https://taxinterpretations.com/cra/severed-letters/2001-0080385) where different ETFs can be considered "identical" so your capital loss will be considered a wash sale and cannot offset any gains.

## Key Terms
- Tax loss harvesting
- Wash sale
- Short-term capital gains
- Long-term capital gains